---
layout: post
title:  "NBA Stats by Draft Analysis"
date:   2022-11-17
author: Max Price
description: Let's scrape data from basketball reference to learn more about NBA franchises.
image: /assets/images/nbadraft.jfif
---

# Exploratory Data Analysis

In our previous blog we pulled the statistics of all NBA players who have been drafted to the league. We'll be using that data to analyze trends in NBA players, the league itself, and how things have changed over time. Here is a [link](https://github.com/maxsprice/stat386-projects.git) to my previous post in case you would like to follow this process step-by-step and gather the data first. If you would rather get right to the analysis, here is a [link](https://github.com/maxsprice/WebScraping.git) to the repository where this data is stored.

Now that we have the data we are ready to start our analysis! There are many routes we can take in analyzing this data, I would like to approach it by asking questions a player or team manager might ask. Using this approach we can develop a more useful analysis, instead of just creating charts and figures that have no rhyme or reason to them. Some of the questions I would like to ask include which colleges have had the most players drafted, what position are they drafted at on average, and how has that changed over time? Which draft position plays for the most years on average and is there correlation between those two metrics? What are the point, rebound, and assist averages for each draft position? Do players drafted higher play more minutes on average, if so, what draft position averages the most minutes a game?

While many of these questions have seemingly obvious answers, we can build charts and run a data analysis to get specific answers and understand the overall picture better. While we may not answer each of these questions, we'll provide a meaningful analysis that will hopefully help get us close.

### Colleges and The NBA Draft

Let's start by looking at our first three questions. which colleges have had the most players drafted, what position are they drafted at on average, and how has that changed over time?
Let's create a visualization that will help us answer that first question. To avoid a crowded visualization we'll limit it to the top 10 schools.


Now let's look at that next question, what position are players drafted at on avg from these colleges. We'll use the colleges picked for the previous vizualization for the sake of uniformity and simplicity.

To answer our final question of how this has changed over time lets use the top 5 schools and look at their average draft position by decade.


### Averages By Draft Position

Now that we've looked at statistics by college, let's look at how metrics like points and years in the league change by draft position.

To start, let's look at which draft positions play the most years in the league on average. We'll limit this to first round picks, the first 30 players drafted, to keep the data simple and legible.

Now let's look at how point, rebound, and assist averages vary by draft position and which position averages the highest in each of those categories.

To finalize our analysis, let's look at what draft position averages the most minutes per game, and if players drafted earlier play more minutes on average.

